>>LISA GARR: Do we go
anywhere after we die?
Did our loved ones go
anywhere after they died?
Is there a collective passing
of souls after a tragedy causing
collective grief?
These and so many
questions have been
at the base of Dr.
Raymond Moody's research
into the near-death experience
for the past 50 years.
Dr. Moody founded the
field of near-death studies
and named the
near-death experience.
He described the near-death
and shared-death experiences
through his 12 bestselling
books sold to millions of people
worldwide.
And he's here with us to
share some of those questions
based on his clinical
and scientific research.
Welcome.
Thank you for joining us.
>>RAYMOND MOODY: Thank
you so much for having me.
I'm just always
delighted to be here.
>>LISA: It is my true joy.
And I will share
with my audience
that you were my
professor that helped
me discover that I had
a near-death experience
several years after I had it.
And then, I got to write about
it and reverse engineer it.
And so I thank you in
person for helping me.
>>MOODY: Thank you very much.
>>LISA: And so many others.
So you've listened to
thousands and thousands
of stories of people
who have shared
or near-death experiences.
After all of these
stories, do you
believe that there are multiple
dimensions that we live in?
>>MOODY: Well,
what I have to say
is, before I went
to medical school,
I was a logician and
philosophy professor.
So this is just me.
But I can honestly tell
you that if you asked me
if, for example, I believe
that there is life after death,
I would have to say no because
I haven't internalized it yet.
>>LISA:
>>MOODY: But what I will say is
that I'm in a phase of my life
where I have to give up.
The only thing I can say is
that it does appear to me
that there is life after death.
I can't say I believe it.
It hasn't been internalized
because it's still
very counterintuitive.
>>LISA: as a philosopher and
a logician, as you realize
there are countless
stories, wouldn't you
put that together as evidence?
>>MOODY: Well, it's
very hard to go
from stories to any sort
of claim about anything
beyond because of the
difficulties in logic
and so on.
However, at a certain point--
well, let me explain.
Some years ago, I was in Italy.
And after my lecture on
near-death experiences,
an Italian surgeon
came up and led me away
to the back of the room.
And you could tell
that he had been
through something which had
changed him very dramatically.
So in a very awkward
way, he told me
that, some months
before, he had been
doing an elective operation
on a fairly young man who
was in overall good health.
So there was no thought of
anything untoward happening.
But in the surgery, the
man had a cardiac arrest
and the doctor was
unable to revive him.
And so he was beside
himself saying,
you know, how did this happen?
And what am I going
to say to the family?
Whereupon he said the
operating room door swung open
and a woman came screaming in.
At first, he thought
she was psychotic.
And you know how when
you're stressed out
you can't make sense of what
somebody's saying anyway,
so he said he had to focus
on her face to figure out
what is this woman saying?
And he said he realized she was
saying, my husband is not dead.
She said, I was out
in the waiting room,
and my husband
came to me, and he
said that you think he's dead.
And I'm supposed to come
in here and tell you
that he's not dead.
So the surgeon told
me that he was so
flabbergasted he
doesn't even remember
resuming the resuscitation.
He went on automatic.
But after a while, lo
and behold, the heart--
so he was there in
the recovery room
when the patient
regained consciousness.
And he said the patients
looked at him and said,
Doc, I was up above
my body up there
looking at you down
there, and I could
tell you thought I was dead.
And I kept trying to tell you
I'm not dead, I'm not dead,
but you wouldn't hear me.
So I went out into
the waiting room
to try to tell my
wife to come in here
and tell you that I'm not dead.
Now I could give you
a dozen other stories
of that character from
physicians who've empathically
co-participated in the
near-death experiences
of their patients.
And so I have to say I can't
think my way out of that one.
So I have to haltingly say there
appears to be life after death.
But it has not
internalized to me yet.
I am still not sure I want
there to be an afterlife.
Now--
>>LISA: Why?
Why?
>>MOODY: Well, you
know, not coming
from a religious framework, I
had developed my worldview sort
of through astronomy,
actually, when I was a kid.
And I had grown
up with this idea
that there's a certain
aesthetic quality of the story--
the beginning, and the
middle, and the end.
And I was reconciled to that.
And it's a rather
startling notion to--
I mean, I was always interested
in the near-death experiences.
I always understood that
the patients were sincere.
And I also understood
it wasn't brain damage.
Because people say, oh, this
is the oxygen flow cut off
to the brain, and that's
not correct, in many cases,
because the identical
same experience happens
to bystanders at the death
of someone else, who are not
themselves ill or injured.
But when their
loved one dies, they
say that they themselves
leave their body
and go toward this light.
And so there's something
else going on here.
But what I have to say is that
I don't know whether I want
it to be, but whether
I want it to be or not,
it looks like it is.
>>LISA: Wouldn't
you want to stay
connected to your children?
>>MOODY: Yes, those
things are in the works.
Of course, I have
those feelings.
And, at the same
time, you wonder
what the context would be, see?
I mean, it's--
>>LISA: Of course.
Of course.
>>MOODY: can honestly
tell you here,
I say this all the
time to people,
and I lecture to
audiences of all ages.
And when I say this that
I'm going to tell you now,
I get very
interesting reactions.
And what I say is, I am sick
and tired of Raymond Moody.
Now when I say that
in a big audience,
I look at people who
are my age range.
And I see them.
Mmhm.
They get it.
But then, I see the
younger people, like,
is he depressed or whatever?
So for those of you who plan
to face the '70s one day,
it's really neat.
And it's the happiest
time of life.
But the idea that I
would be Raymond Moody
forever, and ever, and ever
is beyond horrifying to me.
>>LISA: You've done it.
You've been there done it.
>>MOODY: Yeah.
>>LISA: Well, you've
got a little while left
to go because you
have a lot to teach
and a lot of incredible
stories to share with people.
Now, one of your journeys,
looking back in your life,
was this incredible
journey to the Oracle
of the Dead in Greece.
Now that had to have
been fascinating
when you went to Greece.
>>MOODY: Yeah, Yeah.
You see, the most interesting
series of events in history
is the story of ancient
Greek philosophy.
If you wrote that up
and wrote as an article
and submitted it to
the National Enquirer,
they would reject it because
it's too unbelievable.
But basically, my
first year in college I
learned that early
Greek philosophy
was connected with
these institutions
that they called
"Oracles of the Dead."
And the Greek comic playwright
Aristophanes and his play,
"The Clouds," specifically
accuses Socrates of calling up
the spirits of the dead.
And many of these
early philosophers
were supposed, in the
public mind at the time,
to be people who
evoked the dead.
And so I knew about these
oracles of the dead in college.
But in 1985, I read article
in a classical journal
that the most famous of
the Oracles of the Dead
had been rediscovered.
And based on what
they found there,
I was able to figure out
what they were doing.
But it's basically what they had
was a big bronze cauldron down
in a subterranean chamber.
And it was indirectly
lighted by torchlight.
And so they would fill
this big cauldron up
and no doubt polished
somewhat on the inside--
fill it up with
water and probably
a layer of olive oil on
top because that's still
how they do it.
>>LISA: it could
create a mirror effect?
>>MOODY: right--
in the Middle East.
And so under those
circumstances,
when you gaze into the optical
depth, you see visions.
Then, they had various
ways of getting you to talk
about the person who died.
And I have reproduced this.
You can actually go
through a procedure
where you actually seem
to see and converse
with a dead relative.
>>LISA: Well, there's
a great video of this,
and it is living
actually here on Gaia TV.
David Hinshaw did
this great video
called "Seeing the Unseen."
Take a look at Raymond Moody
walking through this Oracle
of the Dead in Greece.
>>MOODY: Dr. Doceris, in
his search for the site,
surmised that in fact the
oracle was in the Northwest
corner of Greece in Epirus.
Homer talks about the oracle
being located at a point
where two rivers flowed together
to form the Acheron River
and that there was
a pinnacle of rock.
All Dr. Doceris did was to trust
Homer and to go to the location
that he believe Homer was
talking about, excavated,
and indeed did find this
subterranean complex there
exactly at the location where he
surmised Homer had located it.
The institution
was subterranean.
This was another factor in why
it was so long undiscovered.
Even in its heyday,
in antiquity,
it was entirely underground.
In approximately
160 BC, the Romans
burned the Oracle of the Dead.
And at this point, this dropped
out of Western civilization
as we know it.
Then, subsequently, in about
350 AD, the church banned it.
They made it anathema
for a Christian
to believe that a spirit
can be seen in a mirror.
And so for that reason, we have
had no continuing tradition
of evocation of the deceased
in Western civilization.
>>LISA: That must have been
amazing to stand there,
where people, in ancient Greece
times really saw and recalled--
>>MOODY: It's amazing.
>>LISA: --their lost loved ones.
>>MOODY: It was very
moving to me, see,
because since I
was 18 years old,
probably the majority of books
I've read since that time
of Greek philosophy and ancient
Greek culture, that's my--
I mean, it's just a fascination
to me since I was 18.
So when my wife
gets mad at me, she
says, oh, just go
upstairs and play
with your friends,
which means, like, read
Plato and Aristotle and stuff.
>>LISA: You were a philosophy
major at 24 years old, right?
>>MOODY: I got my
PhD in philosophy
I was, let's see, I
guess 23 or 24, yeah.
>>LISA: And then,
you became interested
as a forensic psychiatrist.
>>MOODY: Mhm.
>>LISA: What is your
fascination with that?
>>MOODY: In 1966, there
were two incredible murders
in the United States.
One was the Speck killings in
Chicago, the nurses, and then
the Whitman shootings at
the University of Texas,
where he killed, I
think, 17 people.
And I got interested
in homicide.
And then, in 1972 when I
went to medical school,
one of the first
things I did was I'd go
and found the
forensic pathologist,
which, at that time,
nobody wanted to do it.
So I would explain my
interest in homicide.
And so he would take me
along to murder scenes
and let me assist in cases.
And then, I eventually worked
as a forensic psychiatrist
in a maximum security
unit for the criminally
insane with mostly paranoid
schizophrenic killers,
but mass murderers and
occasional serial killers.
Serial killers, that's not
usually an insanity defense.
That's more like sociopaths.
So we didn't have
many of those, but we
had some really weird
ones when we did.
>>LISA: What would you
discover when you were
speaking with these people?
>>MOODY: Well, you
know, I went into this--
to be conservative, I
probably, in my career,
got to interview,
conservatively, say, like,
400 murderers.
And I was really
always fascinated
with why people kill people.
And that's what I wanted
to find out, but I give up.
I don't know.
I just-- I don't know.
>>LISA: You have me on
the edge of my seat.
I would love to know.
>>MOODY: I would, too.
And you know what?
The most interesting thing
about it, to me, was--
because once you get
to know the judges,
then they will call
you in on other cases,
where my personal
friend or something,
and so I got a lot of people
who were not really psychotic,
but who had done these crimes.
And you know, it
was just amazing.
You sit there and you--
people whose judgment
you would trust
in any other context,
when they start
thinking about killing somebody,
their mind goes berserk.
It's like, I was sitting in this
little town in Georgia years
ago and was involved in
a case of a businessman,
local businessman who, totally
out of character according
to his friends,
killed his girlfriend.
But I was sitting there
looking at the records,
and I just looked up to the face
of the homicide detective who
was sitting there with me.
And I just-- first time I
realized it, I said, you know,
people think cops are stupid.
And he smiled, and
he said, we know,
and we use that information.
But it is amazing about--
I really spend a lot of time
trying to figure out murderers
and homicide, but I don't know.
It's fascinating.
>>LISA: Well, how
did you go from being
a forensic psychiatrist
to the near-death study?
>>MOODY: You know,
it's interesting, Lisa.
I came across
near-death experiences
when I was 18 years old, reading
them and the work of Plato.
See, Plato was the first person
who wrote about this along
with his contemporary
Democritus.
Democritus was the
guy who figured out
that this is made of
little specks that are
too small to see, like atoms.
And so he studied these
things, and he said,
there's no such thing
as a moment of death.
He said, what this
is is that even when
the body appears dead, there's
residual biological activity.
But Plato, on the other
hand, took it seriously
as indicator of an afterlife.
And we still have that
same debate today.
But that's how I got
interested in it.
And three years later
in 1965, I learned
that right there in
Charlottesville, there
was an actual living
person, Dr. George Ritchie,
who had had such an experience.
So he was the
first I interviewed
of subsequently thousands
and thousands of them.
>>LISA: And you interviewed
him of his experience.
And so the people that have
these near-death experiences
seem to open up or access
different parts of their brain
that they hadn't accessed prior.
>>MOODY: They do.
>>LISA: I always say that
the experience that I had,
I can never unsee.
>>MOODY: That's right.
>>LISA: I recognized
or realized that there
are boundary-less, effortless
spaces that we live in
that we go in and out.
>>MOODY: Yeah.
>>LISA: And I know that
that's my experience.
>>MOODY: Yeah.
>>LISA: Have you
heard that many times?
>>MOODY: Yes.
Yes, there's all kinds
of things that opens up.
Most commonly people
say that whatever
they were chasing before--
knowledge, or power,
or fame, or money,
they realized that what this is
all about is learning to love
and an occasional
after-effect is
an inspiration to a creativity.
There's this amazing
man in England,
David Ditchfield
is his name, and he
is a phenomenal musician,
and composer, and performer,
who never had any
interest in music until he
was swept under a train,
and run over by a train,
and had a near-death experience,
and now is coming out
with this amazing music.
And in upstate New York,
Dr. Anthony Cicoria,
PhD in physiology, an MD, and a
professor of orthopedic surgery
at NYU, was struck in the
neck by a bolt of lightning,
had a cardiac arrest, and
had a phenomenal near-death
experience, but after
this, developed an interest
in the piano and
started dreaming
that he was playing the
same piece on the stage
and learned how to
transcribe music
so he could transcribe it.
And now, in addition to being
a distinguished professor
of orthopedic surgery is also
an acclaimed concert pianist.
So these experiences do
have very powerful effects
on people.
>>LISA: They do.
It's definitely one of
the most curious topics,
and it's one of the ones that
people are either afraid of,
terrified of death, or curious
about the death experience
before and after life.
But the fact that
there's a whole phenomena
of being able to recall
these lost loved ones,
I actually want to
show a little bit more
of this video, where you're
going down the tunnel
into this psychomanteum
experience.
Take a look at this.
>>CICORIA: We're here at one
of the most amazing places
in the world--
to me, at least.
This is the Oracle of
the Dead at Ephyra,
where, in ancient
times, people would
come to actually see and
visit with the spirits
of their departed loved ones.
And now, we come through this
entranceway of enormous stones,
into a courtyard,
which is laid out
to give the impression
that one is in a cave
or in an underground world.
One has to imagine that, in
antiquity, this was roofed over
so that we literally
felt as though we
were in the underworld.
At this point,
the pilgrims would
have been met by the [INAUDIBLE]
the guides who lived here
to conduct the pilgrims through
the experience of visiting
with their deceased.
A sharp right turn at
the end of the corridor
brings one into a maze,
with narrow passageways,
sharp turns, and it's good
to remember that all of this
was in pitch black.
And then, the visitor
came to the last turn
of the maze, passed through
it into the apparition chamber
proper through
these heavy doors.
And in here, the seeker
underwent the culmination
of his journey.
In this room, there was
a big bronze caldron.
I believe it was probably highly
polished and filled with water
to make, in effect,
a big mirror.
And there, in the
reflective surface,
initially see images,
which, in many cases,
no doubt would then
appear to emerge
from the reflective
surface-- come out actually
into the physical environment--
full color, full size,
three-dimensional and, no
doubt, in many of the cases,
talking so that the seeker would
experience the living presence
of the person who had died.
I'm quite convinced
from my own experiments
in the United States that
after the seeker would leave
this room, he was totally a
different person from then
on for the rest of
his life, dramatically
changed by what
happened to him in here.
>>LISA: So was it soon
after that experience
of seeing this caldron that
you created your own version
of the psychomanteum?
>>MOODY: Well, I found out
about it in about 1985,
and then I did some
preliminary work.
And then, in 1990, I
set up a place where
I could try it out and do it.
I don't do it like it's
a therapy or anything.
To me, it was just
more curiosity.
But once I sort of
learned how to do it,
I taught it to a lot
of psychotherapists.
And there are-- it's now--
there was a handbook
of grief therapy
I saw that has instructions
on how to do this.
In the Middle Ages, for
example, this was a common thing
that physicians knew about.
And if they had a
patient who was grieving,
they could set the
patient up with a mirror
and take them through
this experience
where they seemed to commune
with the person who's dead.
And I'll tell you the truth.
The first 10 I did were with my
students, my graduate students.
And I was kind of
holding back thinking,
I first wanted to observe
it from somebody else.
Because my inclination was to do
it immediately, but I thought,
well, I would rather
hear it from other people
first so that I can get some
more distant take on it.
And so after about 10 I
had done with other people,
I tried it myself.
And I was really startled
because I remember
my students, what was
most startling to me
was that they took it
to be a real event.
I had assumed that they would
just-- being psychologists.
They would say, oh, yes an
interest in the experience.
But was it real?
I don't know.
But in fact, all my
students said, yeah,
they took that to
be a real event.
And so I was thinking, well,
that won't happen to me.
But when I saw my
grandmother, I saw her
as vividly as I'm seeing you.
I heard her voice I
felt her presence.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>MOODY: Did that
make me believe
that there's life after death?
No.
Because you know,
really, what is
the purpose of
believing something,
if you think about it?
I mean, to me, what I
want to know is what is.
To me, it's like when
you get into the life
after death thing,
people say, do you
believe or do you don't believe?
Well, it shouldn't make
a bit of difference
whether somebody believes
that there's life after death
or doesn't believe.
I mean, surely, it either is
or isn't regardless of what
people think.
>>LISA: Well,
couldn't it be part
of the grieving experience?
I mean, the psychomanteum
is looking into the mirror
in a dark space and really--
>>MOODY: It could.
It is, it is.
And it turns out to be
an effective therapy
for some people with
the grieving process.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>MOODY: In terms
of whether it is
a direct manifestation of grief,
my thought is probably not.
The reason is that people
have been taken through this
who had lost their loved
ones decades before,
and there didn't seem to
be that residual grief.
>>LISA: Oh, and they still
saw their lost loved ones?
>>MOODY: Yeah, yeah.
You know what know I
mean, this is really
the first time in my life,
these last few years, that I've
faced this question of whether
I want it to be or not.
I'm not so sure I want it to be.
>>LISA: To be real?
>>MOODY: I don't know that I
want there to be an afterlife.
But regardless of
what I want, I'm
beginning to think there is.
>>LISA: That is incredible.
After 50 years of
listening to people who--
>>MOODY: What I've always
known is two things.
I've always known that
the people were sincere.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>MOODY: Number two,
I've always known
that this is what people have
always called "the afterlife."
Let me explain.
We have this notion
of an afterlife
that's there in the culture.
And what my suspicion
is that notion
comes from near-death
experiences,
the fact that people had
near-death experiences always,
that's what gave people the
idea that there's an afterlife,
see what I'm saying?
So therefore, in a way,
this is the afterlife.
It's what people have always
called "the afterlife."
>>LISA: Yes.
>>MOODY: But then, the next
stage beyond that is hard--
does it go on?
We can't get into it because
time and space breaks down,
see?
People say that it's
not a spatial experience
and it's not a
temporal experience.
>>LISA: So the
near-death experience
started the conversation
of the afterlife,
and the afterlife then
begets the conversation
of the near-death
experience, and as it goes.
>>MOODY: Yeah.
>>LISA: But then, you
get into how wonderful
it is for grief counseling.
You have counseled so many
in the grieving process.
It's a wonderful tool for that.
>>MOODY: It is.
>>LISA: And then,
this apparition,
this possible experience of
being able to see your departed
loved one, that's another
wonderful experience.
I don't know if you actually
know what the psychomanteum is.
I want you to see this
video here that shows,
you've recreated
this experience based
on what you learned at
the Oracle of the Dead.
>>MOODY: Yeah.
>>LISA: Take a look.
>>MOODY: Independently
all over the world
and literally from prehistoric
times, people discovered
that when they gazed into
a clear pond of water,
they would see, of course,
their own reflection.
But as they gazed
longer and longer,
they would see
other things appear,
specifically spirits, sometimes
spirits of their departed loved
ones.
Pretty soon they
realized that it
didn't have to be a clear pond.
They could do the same
thing with a polished metal
bowl filled with olive oil and
placed in an illuminated room
by candlelight.
Then, later still,
they learned they
could do the same thing by
gazing into a polished mirror.
Pretty soon, this insight
was institutionalized
into amazing places called
"Oracles of the Dead,"
most famously in Greece, as
described in "The Odyssey"
by Homer.
People would take
long pilgrimages
to these Oracles of the
Dead in the expectation
of seeing, and visiting,
and interacting
with their departed loved ones.
This knowledge was
all over the world,
notably in Japan, for example,
where the Oracles of the Dead
were built over
clear ponds of water,
with high arched
bridges over the ponds.
And people would sit around
on the shore of the ponds
reflecting, and
talking, and thinking
about their departed loved ones.
Then, they would walk
out over these bridges
and gaze down into the water.
And they would see the spirits
of their departed loved ones
rise up from the water
and sometimes have
lengthy and elaborate
conversations with them.
In the modern world, we've
rediscovered how to do this.
And this is the amazing process
called "the psychomanteum."
>>LISA: It's not only you who
has created this experience,
though.
There's so many
references in history
of mirror mirror on the wall,
and the classic examples
of mirror gazing.
>>MOODY: Aladdin and the lamp is
the brass lamp and the polish.
And that's where
they see the spirit.
>>LISA: Yeah, so
these are all based
on ancient Greek philosophy.
And so you've
spent your lifetime
exploring this to come up with
the fact that you don't know.
Is that true?
>>MOODY: I don't know.
Because what I want
to know is what it is.
I've spent my whole life just--
because I just love
to learn stuff.
And so I can't say that I know.
No.
What I can say is
that I have been
forced into a situation
where the words are almost
extruded from me.
You know, one thing is
absolutely necessary
for me in my life is
to walk every day.
All my life, I'm just an--
>>LISA: Well, that's good.
>>MOODY: It's
absolutely necessary.
It's an addiction.
>>LISA: Yes, I understand that.
>>MOODY: So to me,
the idea for example,
of hurting my foot
is just a horror.
Well, now, I ask myself,
Doctor Anthony Cicoria--
the orthopedic surgeon that
I mentioned who has had
a near-death experience when
he was hit by lightning--
I asked myself, if something
was wrong with my foot,
would I present myself to
Anthony Cicoria for surgery?
And the answer is
absolutely yes.
And I can give you a
dozen other physician
friends of mine in
whatever specialty,
I could go through
that same process.
But unanimously, they tell me
about the experience they had.
Yeah, this is real.
So what am I to say,
you see what I mean?
There is not yet a
genuinely rational way
of working this out.
>>LISA: As a
scientist, I understand
that you would say that.
But as a believer,
what would you say?
>>MOODY: No, I still say
belief is not what we think.
People think they have beliefs.
I think that's--
it's not correct.
People, I don't
know what they mean
when they call "their beliefs."
And in my opinion, in 2018, the
question of life after death
is not yet a scientific
question because there's
no clearly specifiable way
to confirm or disconfirm it.
But it is still a
philosophical question.
And the exciting
point of that is
that philosophy
tries to figure out
new ways of thinking
about things.
And I think that
we're there now.
I think that we now have an
entirely new way of thinking
about the question
of life after death
that actually makes genuine,
rational progress on it
possible.
>>LISA: I appreciate
this because I've
had many people
sit in that chair,
saying, yes, I've
connected with this spirit.
Or, yes, that the people
who have committed suicide
go to a deep, dark place
as if they know for sure.
And you are a scholar
of this material,
and have written
about it extensively,
and created the term.
And I would appreciate
the fact that you say it's
a philosophical conversation.
But my question
for you is, do you
consider yourself an atheist?
>>MOODY: An atheist?
No.
>>LISA: No?
>>MOODY: If somebody
asked me, Raymond,
do you believe that God exists?
I say absolutely not.
And then, I go on to explain.
Because I, Raymond Moody,
am a limited human being.
Any belief that I
can form about God
would be bound to be off base
in one direction or another.
Plus, secondly, when you
think of that sentence,
"do you believe
that God exists,"
the emphasis of that sentence
is on the word exist.
Well, as a logician, I
could sit here and probably
take about an hour,
but I could explain
to you the concept of existence
and even how to symbolize it.
But when it comes
to God, I give up.
What I say is, God is bigger
than the concept of existence.
What I say is, I have a
relationship with God.
And to bring in concepts like
existence, those are concepts--
that's a human concept.
God is something that's
outside of that framework.
>>LISA: I understand.
>>MOODY: Well, then,
what happens when you
have a relationship with God?
For example, in 1990, I moved
into an old gristmill that
had last been rewired in 1950.
I knew it needed rewiring,
but I didn't have the money.
Three years and
four months passed.
In September of
1993, my wife said,
we can get the money together
now for the rewiring,
but we didn't know
an electrician.
So we held hands
by our kitchen sink
and prayed that God would send
us just the right electrician.
The next morning,
the phone rang.
Cheryl picked up.
The phone voice said,
hello, this is B.R. Wilson.
Cheryl said, yes,
B.R., what is it?
And he said, well, your number
just came up on my beeper.
And Cheryl said,
well, we haven't
made a phone call this morning,
B.R., what's this all about?
And he said, well
I'm an electrician.
Oh, we do need an electrician,
B.R., come on over.
Did his inspection, I
sat down on the porch.
Cheryl escorted
B.R. out to his van.
Short time later,
they were back up.
Cheryl, white as a sheet,
and B.R. kind of shaking.
But as she was putting
him into his van, he said,
it's going to be a
few days before I
can get out here to do this.
I come from a very close
family around here.
We love each other very much.
And my 38-year-old brother
had a heart attack--
dropped dead of a heart
attack the other day,
and my mother had a heart
attack on the way home
from the funeral home.
And Cheryl said,
well, B.R., my husband
might be able to
help you with that.
He talks with people
who've been through that,
and B.R. said, well,
my mother gave me
this book called "Life
After Life" to read it.
And see, this is
20-something years ago
and B.R. is still our friend.
So belief-- it's just--
people don't know
what they're talking
about when they say "belief."
I'm sorry, as a
logician, I can say this.
I know that such and such.
I believe that such and such.
I suspect that such and such.
I assume that such and such.
I guess that-- why do we
pick out that one belief?
Why do we say
something like that?
What we're doing is, we're
passing on to our hearer
what degree of
confidence they can
put on what follows the
"that" based on our say so.
If we go up and we say,
I know, we guarantee.
When I say I believe
something, if it
reports something inside of
me, does all these others, too?
I guess, or I
suspect, or I assume.
See what I'm talking about?
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
But yet your latest book
that you haven't released yet
is about God, right?
>>MOODY: It's called "God
is Bigger than the Bible."
Yes.
I was sitting out on the
porch writing this book
about 10 years ago, and this
very nice young man, Brian,
who I had known since he was
17, he was out in our yard
cutting the grass.
And so Brian came
up on the porch
to get a Coke out
of the refrigerator.
And so he said, Raymond,
what are you writing?
And I said, well, I'm
writing a book called
"God is Bigger than the Bible."
And Brian did just like this.
He goes-- Huh.
Sometimes I think his word
is even greater than he is.
>>LISA: Oh, beautiful.
>>MOODY: Isn't that amazing?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>MOODY: He's a lovely person.
But the thought
is so incoherent.
People get to worship
the Bible, a book--
>>LISA: Yes, a story.
>>MOODY: Yeah.
Whereas, God is a
little bigger than--
I just, you know,
the latest count
of the number of stars
in the known universe
is something like 150
billion trillion, right?
Let's say there's four
planets to a star,
that the sun is very unusual.
The Kepler tells us
that they all have some.
Let's say four is
the average number.
That's $600 billion
trillion planets.
According to the Kepler on the
order of 1 out of 1,000 of them
is earth-like, that
means that there's
on the order of a
billion trillion earths.
So the idea that God,
in all that vastness,
is going to get upset
because a couple of gay guys
are living down the street--
see what I mean?
It's like, religion,
I'm not into religion.
>>LISA: Ahh.
>>MOODY: But God, that's
a different story.
>>LISA: I love that definition.
Absolutely.
Thank you for explaining that.
Can I ask you about-- and I know
I've talked with you about this
before-- about suicide,
about those that have
chosen to take their own lives.
What is your philosophical
conclusion around that?
>>MOODY: Well, I can address
this as a psychiatrist,
and also as a person who's lost
an uncle from suicide years
ago, and also as a person
who has tried it myself.
>>LISA: You have?
>>MOODY: And have
talked with thousands
of people with
near-death experiences
and probably a couple
of hundred of them
who had near-death experiences
as a result of a suicide
attempt.
And my opinion on the basis
of that is it doesn't work.
It's like, people
tell me is that you--
number one, you
immediately regret it.
These are people with
near-death experiences.
And it's not like they
said that if they'd
gone through to
completion they felt
like they would
have been in a hell,
but more that they would have
had to have seen the effect
that their action had on the
lives of their loved ones.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>MOODY: And also,
people say it's like,
you immediately feel
like you walked out
of the movie in the middle.
Like, it's that kind
of frustrating feeling,
as they describe.
You see, I have a different take
on the world than most people.
>>LISA: Which is?
>>MOODY: I guess the Hindus
come up with this independently
of me, but I--
where I've come to my
thought in all this
is that this thing we're
in, that the closest analogy
we have to it in this
world is a kind of theater.
Elie Wiesel said, God made
man because he loves stories.
What is your personal identity
but your story, right?
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>MOODY: And as I'm
beginning to gather,
when you're finished this
with this one, I gather--
my best guess is you go through
some incomprehensible process,
and then you're back
on another story.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>MOODY: And so knowing
the story from within
is very, very interesting,
the things I've learned.
I often ask people,
see, let's suppose
that you were diagnosed with
a terrible infection that
required you to be
isolated on a desert island
all by yourself for 10 years.
>>LISA: In order to live?
>>MOODY: Mm-hm.
And they could
take you out there
on a cargo plane with all the
food, and water, and medicine
you're going to
need for 10 years,
plus there's enough room in
there to carry a DVD player
and, let's say, 2,000 DVDs.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MOODY: Well, what I
would ask you is, would you
choose all comedies?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>MOODY: You would?
You're only the third person out
of the thou-- most people say
no.
>>LISA: I'd do research.
>>MOODY: Yeah, but
then, I say, well,
would you choose
some tragedies, too?
And they say, yeah.
And I say, well, when
you were watching
that tragedy on the desert
island, would you be crying?
Well, sure.
And so what I'm
getting at is, if there
is a frame of reference
outside of this, you see--
>>LISA: Yes?
>>MOODY: --paradoxically,
I might consciously
choose to go through
things that are unpleasant.
I do it all the time anyway.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>MOODY: I mean, you know,
if you're good to learn--
>>LISA: It's part of
the human experience.
>>MOODY: Yeah, well,
I mean, I tell you,
going into the
anatomy lab is not
a pleasant experience the first
day, you know what I mean?
So you do things that are
unpleasant knowing that you
will learn out of them, right?
So that was just an
illustration more than anything.
>>LISA: Yeah.
OK, so if you were
to do something--
say, you have another
50 years to live.
Raymond,
>>MOODY: Oh, no.
>>LISA: Say, for example--
wait a minute-- and if
you had absolute health,
and you're vibrant
and so forth, what
would you do now based on
this current landscape?
If you had the world at your
fingertips, what would you do?
>>MOODY: Well, mostly, I
would hang out with my kids.
And my work, which is
a big important thing,
too, I would just go on.
I'm always exploring new topics.
>>LISA: Like?
Like, what would you explore?
>>MOODY: Well, you know,
this one seems a little bit
off the wall, but I am
not into UFOs, by the way.
My guess, as an
amateur astronomer,
I don't think there are
UFOs, and I hope I'm wrong.
But what I am talking about
is something different here.
But obviously, you
think about the--
it seems highly
probable that there
are extraterrestrial
civilizations out there.
And one thing you
get into with that
is what is called "the
increments or ability
problem," which
is-- it was first
stated by a guy
named Lichtenberg
in the 18th century, who
was a German scientist
and philosopher, who pointed
out that another intelligent
species may have different
rational principles so
that there may not be
mutual intelligibility.
It's like, in the--
the day the Earth stood still
it was like the nonsense, right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>MOODY: And so I
think that there
are ways around that, that I
think that there are ways where
you could think out
in entirely new ways
to think of to communicate
with intelligences that
didn't operate on the same.
>>LISA: Ah, that's what
you would be interested in.
>>MOODY: Yeah, I have
a lot of projects,
but that's been one I've
been working on for years.
I'd probably do
something on that.
>>LISA: Look into different
intelligences in the universe?
>>MOODY: Yeah.
>>LISA: The life after
life thing you've done.
The near-death experience
thing you've done.
You want to move to
different types of--
>>MOODY: I always
am doing new stuff.
Yeah, I've just sort of
been reviewing lately
the history of psychiatry.
And recently, I've been
reviewing toxicology, too.
In my forensic work,
I studied toxicology.
And every few years,
I come up with--
yeah, I just go back
and review all that.
You know, one of the great
homicide detectives out here
you have is Lieutenant Kenda,
who was in Colorado Springs.
He's an eminent
homicide detective,
and he's wonderful-- a
really brilliant man.
And I was seeing one of
his shows the other night,
and he was saying that
poisoning is very rare
and that, in his career, he had
only seen three poison cases.
And I was thinking,
wow, interesting.
Because my input, being
a little different,
I got to be about seven--
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>MOODY: poisoners
that I got to.
So you know, it's poison--
there's just so many things
to be interested in, really.
>>LISA: Not many
people are quite
interested in as many things
as you're interested in.
And personally,
it feels like you
have talked about this so much
with the near-death experience
and life after life, and
it seems to, in a way,
be a burden to you.
>>MOODY: That's a very
interesting thought,
because it is.
I mean, in the sense that I
have heard thousands of people
with near-death experiences.
I can't wait to hear
the next one, right?
So, yes, this is
endlessly fascinating.
And at the same time, there
are just so many other things
I'm fascinated with.
And also, that there is
a much bigger context
for thinking about these things
like near-death experiences
that is so exciting that
actually does lead us
to entirely new ways
of researching it.
But the problem in this whole
field was best stated by Plato.
Now this just sounds
so off the wall,
but I can assure
everybody listening
to this that, in the West,
rational inquiry into life
after death has never made it
one inch past Plato and Hume.
Parapsychology, I'm sorry,
is a pseudo science.
In 2018, to say
that we could have
scientific evidence of an
afterlife is just fallacious.
The real fact is
that the question
of life after death in 2018 is
not yet a scientific question.
It's still a
philosophical question.
And therefore, the people
who really have the situation
correctly are Plato and Hume.
And what Plato pointed out is
there is a very big difficulty
in this whole field when you're
trying to look at the afterlife
rationally, which consists,
he says there's always
got to be two things.
Number one, there's
always got to be a story.
Because the notion
of an afterlife
is self-contradictory.
Life after death is a
self-contradiction, right?
And so it's a hard concept.
And so people have
to have a story.
But then, Plato said--
and near-death experiences would
be one of the type of stories--
but he said, even if you had
a billion stories, that's
not going to add up to
a proof of an afterlife
because what you need is
some set of concepts that
can take you from the
stories to the statement
"there's an afterlife."
And that's where
we fallen down at.
I claim that we
can solve that now.
But the difficulty is
that very few people
enjoy conceptual things.
We all love stories, right?
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>MOODY: But when it
gets down to concepts,
our eyes may glaze over.
>>LISA: Well, what about--
no, I mean, the studies
that are being done with
Jim Tucker at the University
of Virginia about
the children who
had the experiences of the
pre-existence of their life
with wounds and birthmarks?
There's evidence.
There's so many
different bodies of work
that are being researched there.
>>MOODY: Well, listen,
I respect those people.
And I know Jim.
This is great stuff.
However, it's still the
methodological problem is--
and I'm sorry-- it's
just, that's the fact--
it's the real deal--
>>LISA: It's still philosophy.
>>MOODY: That's right.
It's not possible to make
the kind of inferences
that they try to make based on--
but this is all good news
because the real difficulty
is that the logic that
we have doesn't work.
But now, that's solved.
We can go through a
process where, now, we
have an entirely new way of
thinking about these things.
But see, this is the
sticking point right now--
that most people are
not going to want
to think through a
logical argument which
would get them to a better place
with the stories down the line.
Because the stories
are so captivating,
we want to stay at the
level of the stories.
>>LISA: I agree.
I did an entire
afterlife series.
I interviewed 24 professionals,
doctors, professors,
experiencers-- just a minor
amount of experiencers--
came up with these incredible
stories of life after life.
And I guess you're saying,
they're all just stories.
>>MOODY: Well, they are
stories, and they're
very inspiring stories.
>>LISA: And they're real--
>>MOODY: And they've
changed my life and so on.
And we need a better
way to think about them.
>>LISA: I think they're
lifesaving, Raymond.
>>MOODY: Oh, they are.
They are.
Oh, no, listen,
this is not anything
bad about near-death experience.
As I said, I can't wait
to hear the next one.
And therefore, what we need
is some new set of concepts
to think through how
to think about them
is what I'm getting at.
>>LISA: And what would
you suggest those are?
>>MOODY: Well, basically, I've
worked out a system of new
logical principles, where it
enables you to think about
things that don't
make any sense--
to think about them logically.
The nonsense.
Yeah, yeah.
And this has had some results.
There is one man who went
through this training years
ago-- a scientist and artist
who is fairly well known,
and then subsequently had
a near-death experience
and, because of what he
learned in the seminar,
made some insights about it and
could explain it in ways that
people couldn't if they didn't--
so it's all going out in
a very positive direction.
>>LISA: Yeah, because you have
formed an entire body of work
for 50 years on this topic
of the near-death experience.
And wouldn't you want to
make sense of it, after all?
>>MOODY: Yeah, and you know,
there's a paradox in this
because nothing is more
important than the question
of life after death, probably.
I mean, it's a pivotal
question, really.
Everything else sort
of turns around it.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>MOODY: And so there's nothing
more important than that.
And so then how do you deal
with a conceptual system that
helps you think about it, see?
But in the order
of the methodology,
the methodology
is more important.
The question is more important.
But in terms of
your process, you've
got to first go through
the method of thinking
to get to the point where you
can think about the afterlife,
is my opinion.
>>LISA: Right.
So would you say that your
biggest reason, your biggest
why that you have had this
whole conversation about life
after life for the
past 50 years is what?
>>MOODY: Curiosity.
I just really--
I mean, I just
want to know stuff.
What I want to know is what is.
And it's not just
near-death experiences.
It's philosophy, and
homicide, and astronomy.
And I mean, I just
want to know stuff.
And I also realize that I'll
never know much of anything.
When I was seven
or eight years old,
I looked through a telescope
for the first time,
and I remember having that
thought that I'll never
know much of anything.
But it's fun trying.
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
That's well said.
Thank you so much for sharing
and exploring curiosity
with us.
>>MOODY: Thank you.
>>LISA: And if you
would like to watch
any of my other interviews
with Dr. Raymond Moody,
go to "Inspirations" on Gaia.
I'm Lisa Garr.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay aware.